transports/ssh: support proxy_jump (#4951)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/ssh.rst

This section explains how to use the ``ProxyJump`` or ``ProxyCommand`` feature of ``ssh`` in order to make this jump automatically.

.. tip::

  This method can also be used to avoid having to start a virtual private network (VPN) client if you have an SSH account on a proxy/jumphost server which is accessible from your current network **and** from which you can access the *TARGET* machine directly.

SSH configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To decide whether to use the ``ProxyJump`` (recommended) or the ``ProxyCommand`` directive, please check the version of your SSH client first with ``ssh -V``.
The ``ProxyJump`` directive has been added in version 7.3 of OpenSSH, hence if you are using an older version of SSH (on your machine or the *PROXY*) you have to use older ``ProxyCommand``.

To setup the proxy configuration with ``ProxyJump``, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)
and add the following lines::

  Host SHORTNAME_TARGET
      Hostname FULLHOSTNAME_TARGET
      User USER_TARGET
      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida
      ProxyJump USER_PROXY@FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY

  Host FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY
      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida

> Replace the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

Author: There are many resources, rather than providing links to a commercial service I'd rather suggest that people use their favorite search engine.

AiiDA configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When :ref:`configuring the computer in AiiDA <how-to:run-codes:computer:configuration>`, AiiDA will automatically parse most of required information from your ``~/.ssh/config`` file. A notable exception to this is the ``proxy_jump`` directive, which **must** be specified manually.

Simply copy & paste the same instructions as you have used for ``ProxyJump`` in your ``~/.ssh/config`` to the input for ``proxy_jump``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ verdi computer configure ssh SHORTNAME_TARGET
   ...
   Allow ssh agent [True]:
   SSH proxy jump []: USER_PROXY@FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY

.. note:: A chain of proxies can be specified as a comma-separated list. If you need to specify a different username, you can so with ``USER_PROXY@...``. If no username is specified for the proxy the same username as for the *TARGET* is used.

> .. dropdown:: Specifying the ``proxy_command`` manually

Reviewer: Hmm, now that I see this, I'm not sure if I would hide it in a dropdown. Although using `ProxyJump` is obviously preferable, users that _do_ use `ProxyCommand` should not miss this message. Maybe use `important` instead?

Author: Done, thanks.

> .. dropdown:: Specifying the ``proxy_command`` manually

Author: ```suggestion
.. important:: Specifying the ``proxy_command`` manually
```

SSH configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To decide whether to use the ``ProxyJump`` (recommended) or the ``ProxyCommand`` directive, please check the version of your SSH client first with ``ssh -V``.
The ``ProxyJump`` directive has been added in version 7.3 of OpenSSH, hence if you are using an older version of SSH (on your machine or the *PROXY*) you have to use ``ProxyCommand``.

To setup the proxy configuration with ``ProxyJump`, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)
and add the following lines::

  Host SHORTNAME_TARGET
      Hostname FULLHOSTNAME_TARGET
      User USER_TARGET
      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida
      ProxyJump USER_PROXY@FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY

  Host FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY
      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida

> replacing the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
replacing the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

.. note :: 

    Please note that when using `ProxyJump` with AiiDA, the proxy and the target host must use the *same* `IdentityFile`.
    If the user directory of the proxy is shared with the target host (often the case in supercomputing facilities), this is ensured automatically.
```

Author: To be honest I think the formulation of proxy/target "using an `IdentityFile`" is a bit dangerous, people might start copying their private keys. Maybe something like: "the proxy and target must accept the same public key (matching the `IdentityFile`)?

Reviewer 2: I see. Updated suggestion!

Author: the `IdentityFile` IS the private key

> To setup the proxy configuration with ``ProxyCommand` **instead**, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)

Reviewer 2: In order not to overload the user with options, I would suggest to hide this inside a

```
.. dropdown:: :fa:`plus-circle` Alternative setup with ``ProxyCommand``
```

(not mandatory)

replacing the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

In both cases, this should allow you to directly connect to the *TARGET* server using

.. code-block:: console

   $ ssh SHORTNAME_TARGET

For a *passwordless* connection, you need to follow the instructions :ref:`how-to:ssh:passwordless` *twice*: once for the connection from your computer to the *PROXY* server, and once for the connection from the *PROXY* server to the *TARGET* server.

.. dropdown:: Specifying an SSH key for the proxy when using ``ProxyCommand``

   If you need to specify a separate SSH key for the proxy, provide it *after* the ``-W`` directive, e.g.::

        ssh -W fidis.epfl.ch:22 -i /home/ubuntu/.ssh/proxy user@proxy.epfl.ch

AiiDA configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When :ref:`configuring the computer in AiiDA <how-to:run-codes:computer:configuration>`, AiiDA will automatically parse most of required information from your ``~/.ssh/config`` file.

.. dropdown:: Specifying the proxy_jump

    The ``proxy_jump`` *must** be specified manually when configuring the SSH connection and is not automatically taken from your ``~/.ssh/config``.

>     Simply copy & paste the same instructions as you have used for ``ProxyJump`` in your ``~/.ssh/config`` to the input for ``proxy_jump``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Simply copy & paste the instructions you passed to the ``ProxyJump`` directive in your ``~/.ssh/config`` to the input of ``proxy_jump``.
```

>     The same key (if any) as specified for the *TARGET* host will be used to login to the proxy, hence you have to make sure that the public part
>     of your local key is registered in the ``.ssh/authorized_keys`` file for both the *TARGET* host and all of the proxies/jump hosts.
>     The user directory is usually shared between all nodes in a supercomputing facility, hence this is usually ensured automatically.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

SSH configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To decide whether to use the ``ProxyJump`` (recommended) or the ``ProxyCommand`` directive, please check the version of your SSH client first with ``ssh -V``.
The ``ProxyJump`` directive has been added in version 7.3 of OpenSSH, hence if you are using an older version of SSH (on your machine or the *PROXY*) you have to use ``ProxyCommand``.

To setup the proxy configuration with ``ProxyJump`, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)
and add the following lines::

  Host SHORTNAME_TARGET
      Hostname FULLHOSTNAME_TARGET
      User USER_TARGET
      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida
      ProxyJump USER_PROXY@FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY

>   Host FULLHOSTNAME_PROXY

Reviewer 2: does one need that also for the proxycommand version below?

Author: for the proxycommand it would even be crucial since that configuration is not controlled by paramiko but only ssh (since the `ssh` process is spawned). Added.

      IdentityFile ~/.ssh/aiida

replacing the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

> To setup the *PROXY* configuration with ``ProxyCommand` **instead**, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To setup the proxy configuration with ``ProxyCommand` **instead**, edit the ``~/.ssh/config`` file on the computer on which you installed AiiDA (or create it if missing)
```

Author: done

replacing the ``..._TARGET`` and ``..._PROXY`` variables with the host/user names of the respective servers.

> In both cases, shis should allow you to directly connect to the *TARGET* server using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In both cases, this should allow you to directly connect to the *TARGET* server using
```

Author: 🤣 thanks for the catch

.. code-block:: console

   $ ssh SHORTNAME_TARGET

For a *passwordless* connection, you need to follow the instructions :ref:`how-to:ssh:passwordless` *twice*: once for the connection from your computer to the *PROXY* server, and once for the connection from the *PROXY* server to the *TARGET* server.

.. dropdown:: Specifying an SSH key for the proxy when using ``ProxyCommand``

   If you need to specify a separate SSH key for the proxy, provide it *after* the ``-W`` directive, e.g.::

        ssh -W fidis.epfl.ch:22 -i /home/ubuntu/.ssh/proxy user@proxy.epfl.ch

AiiDA configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When :ref:`configuring the computer in AiiDA <how-to:run-codes:computer:configuration>`, AiiDA will automatically parse most of required information from your ``~/.ssh/config`` file.

.. dropdown:: Specifying the proxy_jump

>     The ``proxy_jump`` *must** be specified manually when configuring the SSH connection and is not automatically taken from your ``~/.ssh/config``.

Reviewer 2: will it figure out to use the correct key for the proxy?

Author: I added a comment: with the current design the same key is used (if any) as for the main/target host.
Theoretically you could specify a complete set of configurations for each proxy jump (`ssh_config` allows that).
But that would make the interface rather complicated, so I went with 80/20 rule and simply copy the complete config from the main host.
